---
layout: post
title: Viewing pager messages
tags: radio retro

---

## Viewing sensitive medical information (and birdwatching?) sent through the UK's pager system

The UK [Plans to curtail the NHS use of pagers by the end of 2021](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-47332415). The reasons given in the article are cost, but in reality the security issue is far, far worse.

I like retro technology and security, but the two very rarely combine in a nice way.

By tuning our radio in to one of the official publicly-documented pager frequencies and piping the audio to a software decoder one can see a full stream of information completely unencrypted.

I shan't go into any details on the hows or wheres as I don't want to make a guide, but it's a simple process requiring about 5 minutes of setup and there's plenty of information already out there.

In about 10 minutes of viewing I saw many ambulance callouts, complete with patients names, addresses and other info, and some mobile phone numbers requesting a call.

Thankfully (and surreally) in between the traumatic messages was a steady stream of birdwatchers reporting sightings. So right after we read about a bad RTC there's a Hawfinch spotted on a pub roof to make us go "aww" instead.. but then there's an organ suddenly ready for donation and all the applications of on behalf hopeful recipients stream through to send us back to depression followed just in time by an Ouzen spotted on a fence!

Aside from the ambulance chasing firms probably watching these, or robbers looking for an empty house, it just seems crazy that very sensitive information is broadcast out through plaintext.

I'm not sure what the solution is; Pagers very rarely need their batteries charged and have far more signal coverage than mobile phones, which seem to never work in hospitals in particular. I know Tetra's been floated as an option, but even adding some encryption to the devices could be a start.

It's October 2021 now so hopefully these things won't last too long.
